---
title: Creating Minecraft Skins With AI
featuredImage: ./image.jpg
date: 2021-07-31T00:00:00+00:00
featured: true
---

Machine learning and AI have been all the rage for the past few years. Websites like [This Person Does Not Exist](https://thispersondoesnotexist.com), [This Rental Does Not Exist](https://thisrentaldoesnotexist.com/), and others have shown what modern generative models are capable of. Inspired by these examples, I decided to create [This Minecraft Skin Does Not Exist](https://thisminecraftskindoesnotexist.yahyasohail.com), a website that generates Minecraft skins with AI.

## How does it work?

This Minecraft Skin Does Not Exist uses a Deep Convolutional Generative Adversarial Network (DCGAN). Sound complicated? Let's break it down.

First, let's talk about Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). The generative part of the name is pretty straight forward. They're used to generate images. What about the adversarial part? It's adversarial because training a GAN consists of training two separate machine learning models working against each other. The first model is called the discriminator. It learns how to tell apart, or discriminate between, real images and generated images. The second network is called the generator. It learns how to generate images that fool the discriminator into thinking that the images are real. As one gets better the other initially gets worse and then improves to keep pace. Over time, these models compete and make each other better.

The Deep Convolutional part of the name is a bit more complicated to explain. It essentially means the model uses convolutions (essentially sliding a small filter over the image and determining if it matches the image) as part of the generator and discriminator. DCGANs are fully convolutional, which means they only use covolution, normalization, and activation layers.

## Implementation details

So how was the DCGAN built, how was it trained, and how was the site created? That's all also fairly straight forward.

The DCGAN was written in PyTorch. It works with 64x64 images because I was unable to get it to work with the 64x32 shape of Minecraft skins. When skins are fed into the discriminator, the image is padded with 64x32 black pixels on the bottom. When images are generated by the generator, they have an additional 64x32 pixels at the bottom which are ignored when downloading and displaying the skins.

Training the DCGAN required a lot of training data. I downloaded approximately 50,000 Minecraft skins. I used the `ColorJitter` transformation from the `torchvision` package to randomly shift the color of the skins for the first 300 epochs. I believe this helped the network generalize faster. After that, I removed the `ColorJitter` augmentation and trained for another 150 epochs to help make the colors on the generated images look more sensible. I performed all the training on rented compute from [vast.ai](https://vast.ai).

I wanted the site to be entirely static because that makes it easy and cheap (or even free) to host. To do this, skin generation has to be done client side. The two options I considered for doing this were using ONNX.js and TensorFlow.js. The Open Neural Network Exchange (ONNX) is a cross platform format built to represent machine learning models. PyTorch supports exporting models to the ONNX format, and ONXX.js can run ONNX models in the browser, so at first glance this seems like the perfect solution. However, ONNX.js is now unsupported, and many users report issues when using it with even basic models. Microsoft deprecated it in favor of their ONNX Runtime project, which has beta support for JavaScript in the browser. I didn't want to use unstable software, so I decided against using it.

So I was stuck using TensorFlow.js, but my model was built with PyTorch. I had to figure out how to convert it from PyTorch to TensorFlow.js' format. Doing this is somewhat involved. First I converted the model from PyTorch to Keras using the `pytorch2keras` package, and then I converted the keras model to TensorFlow.js' format using the `tensorflowjs` Python package. Now, I could load the model on the client and use it to generate skins.

The site itself is a simple React app built with Create React App. I hosted it using Netlify's generous free tier.

## The code

The code can be found on [GitHub](https://github.com/yaso9/thisminecraftskindoesnotexist).